The Most UnPopular Dog in Germany-- 
Firoozeh Dumas- 

 My French husband spent the first 18 summers of his life in a small Greek fishing village. Because we moved to Germany from California five years ago, we now often visit this village, where many residents have known him since he was a baby.
 We love Greece and Greeks for a thousand reasons, and the economic problems there pain us terribly. As is the case for most countries in crisis, it’s not just the humans who are suffering but also animals.
 Greece has an abundance of stray dogs. During a vacation two years ago, our 9-year-old decided that she wanted to feed the strays along the roads. We filled the rental car with dog food (apologies to whoever rented the car after us) and bought a lot of hand sanitizer. At one stop, we found an emaciated brown puppy that could barely stand.
 Holding her in his arms, trying to hold back tears, my husband asked, “What do we do?” With our daughter repeatedly shouting, “We must keep her!” what could I have said?
 I always return from Greece with olive oil, walnuts and honey. I knew that “dog” would now be added to that list, whether I wanted it or not.
 Like most Middle Easterners, I had never owned a dog. I was raised to believe that dogs were dangerous. Growing up in America, I was exposed to dogs enough to like them but I never wanted to own one. I always thought it was strange and frankly, unsanitary, to have a dog inside the house.
 My husband put the puppy in the car to drive her to the nearest vet. I had no idea how she would react. Would she try to bite us? Did she have a disease we could catch? Rabies? Mange? Lyme? I might have never owned a dog but I knew all their diseases.
 The puppy curled up on the seat and did not budge. She was more unsure of us than I was of her.
 When we arrived at the vet, we were informed that the short-haired puppy, now named Nutella by our daughter, was 4 months old and needed medication for her infections. I helpfully pointed out the row of sores on her belly. “Those are her nipples,” the vet said.
 After Nutella spent a month at the vet’s, we took her to our apartment in Munich.
 Our city is full of remarkably well-trained dogs. Dogs accompany their owners on public transportation, to restaurants and to many offices. They are not allowed in food stores so they wait patiently outside, some on leashes, others not. It’s an impressive sight to see an unleashed dog sitting outside a butcher shop as the automatic doors open and close, simply waiting for its owner, not acting upon any temptation.
 Given the high standards set by the local dogs, we immediately put Nutella in puppy class, hoping to also meet other owners. Every week, the other puppies mastered commands while Nutella ran around, defying all efforts to be civilized. My husband took it upon himself to defend her. “She knows her commands but prefers not to show that she knows them,” he said.
 “Maybe she’s just not smart,” I suggested.
 “She was traumatized the first four months of her life. That’s why she prefers to do her own thing,” my husband explained.
 “Maybe she’s just not smart,” I suggested.
 We soon found out that members of our puppy class were getting together socially outside of class with their dogs. We were never invited. “It’s because we don’t speak German,” my husband said.
 “It’s because everyone hates our dog,” I told him.
 After a couple of weeks, our trainer suggested that we purchase a special dog whistle and combine that with dog treats. Desperate to have a trained dog, and maybe even a few friends, we immediately did as we were told. Nutella was totally indifferent to the whistle, although many other dogs in Munich responded.
 The trainer then suggested we purchase pricey liver treats that come in a tube. “Dogs will do anything for those,” she assured us. Given the choice of performing a simple command and getting liver treats, or running around like an escapee, Nutella always chose the latter. “This dog has dignity,” my husband said. “You can’t buy her with liver in a tube.”
 We gave up after four trainers, all of them declared “not that good” by my husband. Nutella would never be an off-leash city dog. This did not matter to my husband and daughter, who were in love with her.
 I was not in love with her. At our neighborhood park, Nutella had earned the nickname “der wilde Hund,” the wild dog. I learned enough German to explain that Nutella was simply enthusiastic and wanted to play. But Nutella’s approach was the problem. She would run full speed toward unsuspecting dogs. By the time she arrived to sniff, the dog and his owner had fled the park.

 The Hunt for ‘Fire Cats’ Amid Northern California Ashes-- 
 Thomas Fuller- 
 When a firestorm swept down the hillsides of Sonoma County, bringing terror to this tight grid of thousands of homes, dogs tended to rush to their masters.
 But cats went in the opposite direction, ignoring the pleas of panicked owners and disappearing amid the chaotic evacuation.
 Finding the missing cats that fled the October wildfires has been an impassioned quest for Jennifer Petruska, an animal lover whose home, pets included, was one of the few in her neighborhood to be spared.
 Ms. Petruska has spent nearly every night since the fires tracking and trapping fire cats, as she calls them, the felines that for weeks have remained missing because of stubbornness, trauma, instinct, or a mix of all three.
 Catching cats can be tricky in the best of circumstances but she and her team of volunteers have caught more than 70. They believe many dozens more are on the loose.
 “If you want to catch a cat you have to stay up all night — that’s just the name of the game,” Ms. Petruska said as she prepared for another dark and cold round of cat stalking. “I’ve been a horrible insomniac my whole life, so it suits me.”
 Coffey Park, the neighborhood where Ms. Petruska is focusing her efforts, may as well have been struck by a bomb. Well over 1,000 homes were leveled. Ms. Petruska and her team say they realize that with nearly 5,000 homes destroyed in the Santa Rosa area alone their effort is ancillary to the grieving and massive effort of reconstruction that is only just beginning.
 The bleak landscape of charred lots is still teeming with creatures stealthily crawling throughout the night, mostly unseen.
 Ms. Petruska says she knows there are still many cats on the loose because her motion-activated cameras capture them nearly every night, along with a parade of other nocturnal animals such as skunks, opossums and raccoons.
 To the families who lost everything, recounting how Ms. Petruska helped recover their cats often brings tears.
 “I just wanted my cat — that was the only thing I wanted back,” said Kelly Stinson, whose home in Coffey Park was destroyed. “I spent hours every single day looking for her."
 Ms. Petruska located Evy and after an evening of coaxing returned a day later and grabbed the cat by the scruff of the neck.
 Sara Ratekin, a veterinarian who has treated many of the cats rescued by Ms. Petruska’s team, says the fires have shown the ability of cats to survive perilous circumstances. Captured fire cats often arrive in her office with burned paws, singed whiskers — and many pounds lighter than before the fire.
 Unlike dogs, cats have an instinct to flee when they sense danger, Dr. Ratekin said.
 “I can explain why they ran away,” she said. “But I can’t explain why they became so wild so quickly.”
 In August, during the flooding in Houston caused by Hurricane Harvey, cats were spotted by rescue workers swimming or floating on furniture and debris trying to find high ground.
 When emergency medical workers showed up at flooded homes, dogs would often greet them at the door, tails wagging, said Katie Jarl, the Texas director of The Humane Society of the United States.
 "No matter if it’s fires or flooding, or any type of natural disaster, cats will often hide,” Ms. Jarl said. “It can be days or weeks before they re-emerge.”
 To lure Santa Rosa’s fire cats back into domestic life, Ms. Petruska assembles personality profiles of each cat she stalks. One cat likes the sound of whipped cream fizzing from a can. She carries a can in her car. Another cat answers to the sound of the crinkling of a bag of a specific brand of cat treats. She carries the treats.
 If cats were still home they would often be hiding — and when discovered would need significant coaxing to leave.
 Unsurprisingly the most effective lure appears to be fish. Ms. Petruska soaks socks in the juices from cans of mackerel and hangs them from trees.
 On a recent evening at dusk, she drove through the countless rows of burned out houses to a neighborhood near a small creek. In near freezing temperatures, she hauled a cat trap across the molten remains of a home, careful to step over pieces of roofing and other remnants jutting up through the rubble. She passed a random assortment of household items laid bare in the detritus — a solitary teacup, a blackened metal colander and the burned out remains of a washer and dryer — before setting up a metal trap.
 By morning the trap was still empty. But she has persisted, working through the holidays.
 Around 10 fire cats have been found without any clues as to their owners; they are being kept at Sonoma County’s animal services department.
 She has found cats even after owners gave up the search. Cindy Fulwider fled her home in the early hours of Oct. 9 as embers the size of golf balls rained down. She was convinced that her cat, whom she calls Sweet Baby, had perished. Then she got a call five weeks after the fire from one of Ms. Petruska’s team.
 “I really thought we would never see him again,” Ms. Fulwider said. 
