Bayazit Karaman: 
The brain is one of the most complex organs in the biological body, which is analogous 
to the central processing unit (CPU) in a computer, with respect to its role. The main 
function of a CPU is to convert input into logical operations where all of them are 
predefined by the developer. On the contrary, the human brain, similar to that of the 
advanced species in the animal kingdom, is capable of converting the both known and 
unknown input into output where most of the conversion processes are still a mystery. 
Therefore, deciphering the behavior of the human brain has been a major subject of 
interest for mankind. This has been moderately accomplished by examining the 
electroencephalography (EEG) signals. Simply, EEG is a tool that measures and monitors 
the electrical activity of the brain and records patterns of the brain activity [4, 5]. 
The original EEG data is not sufficient to define the antipodal connectivity between 
neural communities since it operates at a single dimension, which considers the voltage 
from each electrode as the source of the brain activity. The voltage emerging from 
electrical activities in the brain is collected via the limited cross-sectional area of each 
electrode. In reality it is a result of electrical activity stemming from a network of 
neurons. Millions of neurons are interacting with each other while the EEG records the 
data at a single electrode. Additionally, the brain has a complex structure that cannot be 
considered as a flat structure. In fact it resembles a hemisphere comprising a lot of 
smaller curves, where the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) fills the crevices. Both cerebral 
cortex and CSF are electrically conductive. It is a well-known fact that the electrical 
charges inside the closed surface will move freely inside the solid electrical conductor 
until the excess charges gather on the surface of the conductor (Figure 1). These charges will create an electrical field surrounding the sphere as stated in Gauss Law [6, 7, 8]. 
Therefore, models that facilitate projection of one-dimensional EEG data over a three
dimensional hemisphere are essential to understand the wiring principles of the brain. Brain activity stemming from the interaction of the neural populations recorded as waves 
at different frequencies suggest that there may be a distinct communication level between 
the neural populations. Identifying such a distinguished communication level will be 
quintessential to interpreting the brain dynamics. Therefore, the occurrence rate of 
antipodal connectivity for each wave may be used to better understand the behavior of 
neural populations. Hence, the following hypotheses were identified to not only support 
the behavioral assumptions but also help us to achieve additional relevant objectives.A neural network, which has the property of a modular/colonial structure and controls the 
information behavior of a human is governed with a set of organizational principles. The 
structure in this modular/colonial environment is hierarchical and connections are 
established through the mutually exclusive nodes. In other words, neural structures use 
densely intra-connected nodes not only to form modules but also to play a sparsely inter
connector role to establish communication channels (or paths) with other nodes of other 
modules [9]. However, we believe the size, boundary, hierarchy and 
assignments/responsibilities of neural communities are dynamic, in opposition to the 
general concept of predetermined size of modules. Therefore, in spite of the general 
convention of identifying the closely coupled neurons as neural modules, we prefer a 
new term; neural communities because the word community not only symbolizes the 
dynamic relationships in a society but also emphasizes the hierarchical foundation of it. Brain waves operating at different frequencies are related to different functions of the brain 
[10]. This has been a hot topic for physicians and researchers in the last several decades, 
while the studies have often been limited by the capabilities of the EEG system. Therefore, 
use of the EEG system has decreased in recent years with the introduction of new 
technologies. 
EEG was proven to be an effective system to detect and distinguish brain waves. However, 
the problem emerges at the interpretation level where the traditional methods fail to 
comprehend the dynamics beyond the capabilities of the EEG system. Additionally, 
methods such as MEG (Magnetoencephalography), Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) or 
diffusion-MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging), fMRI (functional-MRI) are among the 
studies developed to analyze neural activity. These methods are based on inductive 
reasoning, which provides substantial evidence for the conclusion. In other words, the final 
conclusion is made by examining the relationship between smaller fragments of a larger 
implication. Although, these methods have been proven to be effective in neural analysis, 
one fundamental disadvantage is in the defining of the size of the fragments. This is a 
tedious task because of the immense number (~100 billion) of neurons in the mammalian 
brain. Moreover, the mammalian brain operates non-linearly, inferring that the size of the 
modules is dynamic and that the contributions of these modules neither have similar effects 
on the final conclusion nor are the effects on modules evenly distributed. Therefore, a new 
approach in neural analysis based on deductive reasoning introduces a better perception 
than the existing methodology.For the reasons explained above, EEG emerges as an excellent candidate for utilizing the 
deductive approach because of the data collection method. However, the existing EEG 
data analysis methods are not competent for this task and an enhanced and innovative 
data analysis model is necessary to: 1) contemplate the voltage emerging from neural electrical activity via the limited cross-sectional area of the electrode in a single 
dimension and 2) collect EEG data from separate electrodes (channels) for simultaneous 
correlation in the third-dimensional complex domain.  
The new approach considers data as pairs based on their similarities in a three
dimensional (3D) fashion. Transformation-Normalization-Projection (PNT) used in 
COGSIP projects single-dimensional EEG data into three-dimensions after extracting the 
amplitude and phase angle information using the Hilbert transformation. Consecutively, 
the projected EEG data from each channel is correlated, and the identical degree of 
similarity between two EEG channels at each discreet time-step is defined as antipodal 
connectivity of neural populations. A schematic representation of this property is 
provided in Figure 3. 
 Antipodal connectivity of neural populations is envisioned to have potential 
implementations. The occurrence frequency of antipodal connectivity is predicted to 
depend on various factors such as age, sex, mental health, stress, environment, dangerous 
situations, etc. An advanced cognitive map of the brain can be developed when the 
occurrence rate of antipodal connectivity is associated with different functions of the 
brain. Additionally, by correlating the occurrence frequency for different situations, it 
may be possible to detect brain conditions and disabilities such as autism, epilepsy, 
bipolar disorder, Alzheimers disease, dementia, etc. In almost all cases, especially in 
infants and seniors, the progression of mental conditions can be prevented with an early 
diagnosis. For example, the treatment of autism is extremely difficult. However, it is 
crucial to diagnose it in earlier ages because its progression can be suspended with proper 
education of the individual. Moreover, according to the CDC, epilepsy affects about 2.3 
million adults and 467,711 children 0-17 years of age in the United States [11, 12]. 
Predicting the time of an epilepsy seizure is critical for patients to take action in order to 
prevent life threatening consequences. Therefore, classifying the frequency of antipodal 
connectivity for distinctive brain activities is proposed to provide a better perspective in 
cognitive decision mechanism. 
1.3 Proposed Approach 
The complexity of the neural behavior can be understood if radical approaches containing 
more effective methods are introduced. Therefore, within the scope of this investigation, 
a system based on two new mathematical models and the associated prototype to monitor 
the dynamic behavior of neural population is introduced. Children Children Children Children Children Children Children Children Children Children Children Children Children Children Children. 